---
tags:
  - msbt
---

# Text Editor - Translations
The world is a massive place, and so is the Super Mario Odyssey player base! Translating your work either by yourself or with support from others is vital to ensuring everyone can experience what you make, so how is it done?

## Getting Started with Translating
MoonFlow is specifically designed with translation in mind, featuring a whole file manager mode designed just for translating text between languages. On the Text tab of your project's homepage, switch from **Source** to **Translation**, and select which language you'll be translating to on the bottom[^1]

[^1]: The translation language selector replaces the standard file managing tools. If you need to manipulate files, switch back to source editing.

The translation tag will only show files that have been modified in your project's [default language](../introduction.md#language). Opening any file will create a special version of the MSBT text editor, showing a side-by-comparison between the language you're translating to and the source language. Along with that, the entry list will display which entries weren't modified in the source language, which are pending translation, and which already have translations.

In order to translate an entry, select it with the entry list and disable "Sync with Default Language". Once syncing is disabled, any edits made to this entry in the source language will ***NOT*** be applied to this language. Syncing can always be re-enabled to match text with the default language.

For solo developers who are handling translations by themselves, the process should prove to be simple and streamlined. However, collaborative groups have a couple small catches worth keeping in mind.

## Collaboration
Collaborating with others is as simple as having the translator set up MoonFlow on their device and updating all modified content with accurate translations. However, due to the [no-compile philosophy](#technical.md) of MoonFlow, is an important stipulation.

### Source Control
All files created with MoonFlow should be backed up on some source control platform (ex. Git) to ensure safe backups and allow remote collaboration and merging. However, the text files generated by MoonFlow are stored in archives, like a zip folder. Source control system cannot track changes made to individual MSBT files, only each language's archives (SystemMessage, StageMessage, and LayoutMessage).

This is not a problem for solo developers, but is worth keeping in mind for dev teams. When you update the source language, *all* language's will have that archive updated to preserve stability and text syncing. This does not apply for editing translations, only the language being translated is saved and modified.

Be careful to ensure proper merges! If a translator makes changes to an archive in their language, and then someone modifies an archive in the source language, they are no longer cleanly mergeable. It is recommended that translating be treated as a special step in your project's development, with modifications to the source text being halted while translation work is in progress.

If translations must be done alongside the source language, proceed carefully and make sure to double check any merges for any overridden data!